# Sermon 2942 | The Objective of the Lord's Supper

(No. 2942)

A SERMON PUBLISHED ON THURSDAY, JUNE 29, 1905.

DELIVERED BY C. H. SPURGEON,

AT THE METROPOLITAN TABERNACLE, NEWINGTON, ON THURSDAY EVENING, SEPTEMBER 2, 1877.

"For as often as you eat this bread, and drink this cup, you proclaim the Lord's death till He comes." 1 Corinthians 11:26.

IT seems to me that the Lord's Supper should be received by us often. When the Apostle says, in our text, "As often as you eat this bread, and drink this cup," and our Lord said, in instituting the ordinance, "This do you, as often as you drink it, in remembrance of Me," I will not say that their words absolutely teach that we should frequently come to the Communion Table, but I do think they give us a hint that if we act rightly, we shall often observe this Supper of the Lord. Once or twice in the year can hardly be thought to be a sufficiently frequent memorial of one so dear. In the early Church, it is possible that they broke bread every day--the expression, "breaking bread from house to house," may signify that. From the records preserved in the Acts of the Apostles, it appears that when the saints came together on the first day of the week, they usually broke bread. If there is any rule as to the time for the observance of this ordinance, it surely is every Lord's day. At any rate, let it be often. Do not, dear Friends absent yourselves long from the Table, but since your Lord has instituted this Supper as a necessary and admirable reminder of His death, take care that you celebrate it often.

This Supper is, according to the verse before our text, to be received by all Christians. "This do you, as often as you drink it." It is not to the Apostles, nor to a few men who shall dare to call themselves priests, but to the members of the Church at Corinth and, by implication, to the members of all Christian Churches, that the Apostle wrote, "For as often as you eat this bread, and drink this cup, you proclaim the Lord's death till He comes." Though it is but half a dozen of the very poorest and most illiterate Christians who meet together to break bread, they are helping to proclaim Christ's death till He comes. It is the duty and the privilege of all the people of God--not merely of some of them--to observe this ordinance!

It is to be observed by eating and drinking, not by eating alone, as in the Roman Catholic church! "As often as you eat this bread, and drink this cup, you proclaim the Lord's death till He comes." It is most strange that the Papists should have taken away the cup from the "laity" so-called, since our Lord never said to His disciples concerning the bread, "Eat you all of it," but, as if He foresaw that this error would arise, He did say concerning the cup, as He presented it to His Apostles, "Drink you all of it." If you leave out the cup, you have marred the ordinance and, as I shall have to show you presently, you have robbed it of a great part of its meaning. In the Roman Catholic church--Roman Catholic, did I say? Why there is another church, nearer home, that is twin sister to it and is getting very much like it! And there, too, it is taught that looking at the cup does the spectators good. It is not necessary that your should "communicate," but if they see the "priest" lift the cup, it will do them great good. This is a new way of blessing souls. Salvation used to be by the hearing of the Word, but now, forsooth, it is to be by seeing fine sights! But the Apostle says, "As often as you eat this bread, and drink this cup"--not as often as you look on as spectators, but as often as you actually become partakers in this symbolic feast, "you proclaim the Lord's death till He comes."

You notice that our translators have put this sentence in the indicative, but it is probable that the marginal reading is more correct and that it may be read thus, "As often as you eat this bread, and drink this cup, show you the Lord's death till He comes." Endeavorto do it--realize that you are doing it--let your feelings be appropriate to the meaning of the ordinance--"show you the Lord's death till He comes." As often as true Believers meet together to eat this bread, and drink this cup, they do show, both to themselves and to all who look on, the death of the Lord Jesus Christ.

Just in passing, notice that it is bread that they eat and it is wine that they drink--nothing is said about transubstantiation here! But "as often as you eat this bread"--and it is bread and nothing but bread--"and drink this cup," which still remains but a cup and its contents just what they were before--"you proclaim the Lord's death till He comes."

This will suffice upon the words of the text. And, now, the doctrine that I want to draw from it is that at all times when we come to the Communion Table, we show or proclaim the death of Christ. That is the great end and objective of the Lord's Supper--to set forth--to yell out anew--to proclaim afresh the death of our Lord Jesus Christ!

First, let us consider HOW THIS ORDINANCE DOES PROCLAIM THE DEATH OF CHRIST.

It is all very simple. There is nothing but bread broken and eaten, and wine poured out and afterwards drunk. How can this proclaim the death of Christ? Well, it does. It has done so ever since it was instituted and there are multitudes of Believers who delight to see that death set forth by it!

First, it sets forth the painfulness of Christ's death. It is death that is represented by these emblems, for there is the bread and there is the wine, both separate from one another. When the flesh and the blood of a person are together, they do not present to us the image of death. But the bread, which represents the flesh, altogether separate from the wine, which represents the blood, is the picture of death and death in a violent form--death by wounding, by bleeding. The separation of the life-blood from the body is the form of death which is manifestly set forth here to all onlookers. To my mind the very bread, as we break it, seems to say, "Thus Christ becomes our food." Bread has to pass through many tortures before it becomes food to us. The wheat was sown in the ground. It was buried, it sprang up, it was exposed to cold winds and to hot sunshine before it ripened--and then it was cut down by a sharp sickle. After being cut down, it was threshed, then it was ground into flour, then the dough was kneaded into bread which was baked in an oven and cut with a knife--all of which processes may be used as images of suffering. So the broken bread which we eat at the Communion sets forth the suffering of Jesus. And the juice of the grape also sets forth suffering, for the clusters from the vine are flung together into the winepress and trod by the feet of men, or otherwise pressed until their life-blood spurts forth. Even so was the Savior pressed in the winepress of Jehovah's wrath till His blood was poured forth on our behalf. This Supper sets forth to all who choose to see it, the painfulness of Christ's death.

It sets forth, next, that it was a death of a peculiar kind, a death for others, just as that bread is for us to eat and that cup is for us to partake of. So we say, by this ordinance, to all who look on and especially to ourselves, "When the Lord Jesus died, He died for all His people." We here declare that we believe in Substitution--that Christ died, "the Just for the unjust, that He might bring us to God." And that He, "His own Self bore our sins in His own body on the tree." That is the teaching of this Supper, that Christ's death was a painful death and a death on behalf of others.

This Supper also shows that we believe the death of Christ to be acceptable to God. Why do we spread this Table here in the place where we customarily meet for worship? Is this also an act of worship? Assuredly it is and one of the highest kind! But we should not dare to put these memorials of the death of Christ before the Father if we did not know that the Father had accepted Him. But "it pleased the Lord to bruise Him" and He was pleased with the Sacrifice which His Son offered. He smelled a sweet savor of rest in the death of His dear Son. Therefore, when we worship Him in the most humble manner and after the most solemn fashion, we say to the Lord, "We know that You have accepted the Atonement offered by Your dear Son and we set Him forth before all mankind as the accepted Sacrifice before His Father's face." And I think that we also mean to say by this ordinance, that Christ's Sacrifice is complete and perfect. We would not wish to show it to others if it were not worthy of being looked at! If it were incomplete, we might well keep it in the background until Christ had finished it. But because the cry, "It is finished," rang out from the lips of the dying Sufferer of Calvary, we rejoice to set forth His death to all who come this way! Behold and see that He has not partly paid the price, but He has paid it all! Look here--He has so finished His atoning work that He has spread a feast to which His servants may come and rejoice with exceeding joy! If the Sacrifice were not finished, it would not yet be feasting time. But it is complete and, therefore, do we proclaim it forth after this fashion.

Another great Truth of God that we teach to everybody who sees us at the Communion Table is this--Jesus Christ has died and we live upon His death. This bread and this wine are the emblems of His broken body and His shed blood and, therefore, we eat them and drink them, and so say to you that Christ's dying is our life. Whenever we want to get spiritually stronger, we always feed upon the Truth that Christ died for us. Do any of you deny the Doctrine of

Substitution? We tell you that it is the very essence of our being--that, henceforth, it has become the wellspring of life to us! We could not be happy--we could not have any peace--if that were taken away from us! My heart speaks now in words of truth and soberness and says to you, "There is no Truth which I dare to deny, but, concerning this Truth of God of the Substitutionary Sacrifice of Jesus Christ, it would be absolutely impossible for me to doubt it." Tortures and racks may tear away the strings that are bound about my heart, but they can never make me relax the hold that I have of Jesus Christ my Lord! No, the Lamb of Calvary, bleeding in our place, has become essential to our very being and we cannot, we must not, we will not becloud that blessed Doctrine of His Substitutionary Sacrifice! Is it not all-in-all to us?

We also say to dear friends who may look on at this feast that the death of Jesus Christ has now become to us the source of our highest joy. We are not about to celebrate a funeral. When we come to this Table, we do not come in mournful guise. I know that it has pleased the authorities of certain churches to make men kneel before what they call the altar, but why have they to kneel? Is there any passage of Scripture in which there is even the shadow of any teaching which looks that way? At the Passover, the Israelites stood with their loins girt and their staves in their hand. Why was that? Because they were expecting to go out of Egypt and were not, then, out of the land of bondage. He who is under the Law, when he eats his Passover, must eat it with his loins girt and with his staff in his hand. But how did the disciples eat the Lord's Supper? Why, reclining in the easiest posture possible! It was a most solemn supper, but it was a supper. It was the ordinary meal consecrated by the Lord to the great purpose of setting forth His death! And to make us kneel to receive it is, to my mind, to take away a great part of the teaching of it! We should sit at the Communion as easily as we possibly can--as we would at our own table--because "we which have believed do enter into rest"--and part of the teaching of the Lord's Supper is that now, in Christ, we have perfect peace and we rest in Him as we feed upon Him. This ordinance is a feast, not now a subject for sorrow, but a theme for delight!

And once more, Beloved, when we come to the Lord's Table to proclaim Christ's death, we show it as the bond of Christian union. The point of union among Christians is the death of the Lord Jesus Christ. I am afraid that it will be many long years before we shall get all Believers to agree concerning Baptism. I hope right views of that ordinance are spreading, but it does not seem to me to be a point where all Christians are likely yet to unite. But, concerning our Lord's death, all who really are His people are agreed! If we are in Him, we rejoice in that grand foundational Truth, "that Christ died for our sins according to the Scriptures," and we delight to think that by His death He has redeemed us from death. So, dear Brothers and Sisters, if you cannot meet your fellow Christians on certain doctrines because some of you are strong men in Christ and others are but babes--and the babes cannot crack the nuts or eat the strong meat upon which swine feed--you can all unite in Christ! He is like the manna which suited all the Israelites in the wilderness-- young or old, they could all feed on the manna and so can all the saints feed on Christ! And when we sit at the Communion Table, we say to all the world, "We are all one in Christ Jesus. We do not come to this Table as Baptists, or Episcopalians, or Methodists, or Presbyterians--we come here simply as those who form one body in Christ--they who agree to show forth to all mankind the death of our adorable Lord."

Secondly, let us consider WHY THE LORD HAS TAKEN MEANS TO SHOW THIS TRUTH.

There are a great many important Truths in the Bible and every Truth of God ought to be kept in remembrance, but it is not concerning every Truth that the Lord has appointed an ordinance to keep it in memory. The Doctrine of Election is one that we firmly believe, but we have no special token, type, or symbol to set it forth.

It is the death of Christ which is set forth by this memorial Supper. Why was that chosen? I answer, because it is the most vital of all Truths. Concerning the sacrificial death of Christ there must not be tolerated any dispute in the Christian Church. That must forever stand as a settled Doctrine of the Gospel. The atoning death of Jesus Christ once put away, you have taken the sun out of the Church's Heavens. Indeed, you have taken away all reason for the very existence of the Church of Christ! I think it was Dr. Priestley, a Unitarian, who had a brother who was a sound Calvinistic Divine and who came and visited him. And he agreed to let him preach for him one Sabbath morning, on condition that he promised not to preach on any controversial subject. The good man gave the promise, but rather regretted, afterwards, that he had done so, yet he managed to redeem his promise and also to clear his conscience, for he preached on the next Sabbath morning from this text--"Without, controversy great is the mystery of godliness: God was manifest in the flesh," from which he proved that the Godhead of Christ is a Truth about which no controversy could be allowed. We put the Doctrine of His Substitutionary Sacrifice in the same category--these is no true Christianity without it! You have given us merely the shell and the husk if you take away this great central Truth of the Gospel--God's Justice vindicated by the death of His dear Son and, on that ground, free pardon published by the Grace of God to the very chief of sinners who believe in Him! This Doctrine, which some despise and decry, is the very essence of the Gospel of Christ! We have no question with regard to the truth of it, neither do we speak with bated breath concerning it, for our Lord Jesus instituted this Supper in order to keep this Truth of God before men's minds because it is the point above all others that is vital to the Gospel.

Another reason is because so many combat this Doctrine. It has been the Hougomont of the great Waterloo which has been fought against Christ. All His adversaries rally against this Truth. When any man becomes unsound upon other points, if you probe deeply enough, you will find that he has become unsound upon the Doctrine of the Atonement. The Substitutionary Sacrifice of Christ is the one thing which His enemies are aiming to overthrow. They cannot endure it! They profess to be greatly offended by our frequent use of the word, blood, yet that word is one of the most conspicuous words in both the Old and the New Testaments, so we will still say, "Without shedding of blood is no remission," and, "the blood of Jesus Christ His Son cleanses us from all sin." This Communion Table sets forth the broken body and shed blood of Jesus Christ, our Lord and Savior, and so brings His atoning Sacrifice before men's minds--and thus His Church, so often as she observes this ordinance, proclaims Christ's death in the teeth of all opposers--and this she means still to do "till He comes"!

No doubt the Lord also instituted a symbol for the maintenance and propagation of this Truth because it is a most blessed one to sinners. Poor souls, there is no comfort for you till you know that Christ died in your place. Your conscience, if it is really awakened, will never be pacified with ceremonies! Nor will it be contented with moral precepts which you cannot carry out. Nor will it be lulled to sleep with the idea of your own religiousness ever saving you. Your awakened conscience makes you ask, "How can God be just and yet pardon me?" And it is the martyred body of your Lord that answers that question--

"Till God in human flesh I see, My thoughts no comfort find. The holy, just, and sacred Three Are terrors to my mind."

But when you come to see Christ on the Cross dying instead of you, then will comfort come into your mind, O distracted seeker--but not till then! Therefore is it that God bids His ministers preach Jesus Christ and Him Crucified and, therefore is it that as often as we come to this Table, we proclaim His death because sinners need that beyond everything else.

And, Beloved, there is another reason, I think, why this Truth of God was selected to be set forth in this memorial Supper, namely, that it might certify the Truth to your own soul What arrow will ever pierce the heart of sin unless it is dipped in the blood of Jesus? When I see sin punished on Christ, I see the evil of it. When I see Christ dying for my sin, I see the great motive for my dying for my sin. When I behold His griefs and pangs on my behalf, I see a reason why I should make abundant sacrifices in order that I may glorify Him. Beloved, the death of Christ is the great sin-killer and he who truly knows it and understands it, will feel its sanctifying power!

At the same time, this Truth greatly glorifies God. When do you ever praise God so well as when you, a poor guilty sinner, stand at the feet of the Cross and see that Christ died there for you? The sweetest songs in all the world are those that are sung around the Cross by sinners saved by Sovereign Grace. And each one sings unto the Lord, "Wash me in the fountain and make me whiter than snow. Then shall every part of my being praise You and my whole nature shall break forth in ecstatic joy magnifying and blessing the name of the Lord who is able to put away such offenses as mine through the precious blood of His dear Son." You will thus be enabled to glorify God when you come to this Table and meditate on the great atoning Sacrifice by which your sin is forever put away.

I feel that I can say, without boasting, that my ministry and this ordinance agree well together. I have long preached to you Jesus Christ and Him Crucified. I have fully preached to you His vicarious Sacrifice. And when you come to this Table, you can realize that the Truth which I have preached to you links on to this ordinance. But how anyone can piece together a dry philosophy and this service, I do not know. Having left out the grand fundamental Doctrine of Atonement, how they can make anything but a farce of the Communion, I cannot even guess! I should think they might as well abolish it from their services and let the symbol go when the substance has already gone! But it cannot be so with us,

for we feel that God would have His people always think of Jesus! He would have them often speak of Jesus! He would have them continually bear witness to the death of Jesus and, therefore, He makes this Communion to be the sweetest of ordinances to point us, with unerring finger, to Christ on the Cross!

Now, thirdly, will you please take notice of THE PERPETUITY OF THIS ORDINANCE AND THE REASON FOR THAT PERPETUITY? "You do proclaim the Lord's death till He comes" When He comes, we shall not need these symbols, for we shall have the Master, Himself, with us, but, " till He comes" we are to observe this ordinance.

What do I learn from this? Why, dear Friends, that His death will be efficacious "tillHe comes." You are not called to show to the world something that is worn out. You do not come to this Table to set forth to the people who will look on something whose force is spent. Oh, no! You can still sing--

> DDear dying Lamb, Your precious blood   
> Shall never lose its power   
> Till all the ransomed Church of God   
> Is saved to sin no more!   

And every time any of you who are unconverted, but are seeking the Lord, see this Table spread, you should say to yourselves, "Those people believe that there is still efficacy in Christ's blood, or else they would not keep up the observance of that Supper." Yes, we do believe just that, and we believe that Jesus is able to save you now if you come to Him--able at once to speak peace and pardon to your heart if you do but trust Him!

Another thing I learn from our text is that as this Supper is to be celebrated "till He comes," it shows that there will always be a Church of Christ to celebrate it. There always has been a Church of Christ since He founded it. In the darkest Popish days, Christ always had His little Church to observe this ordinance. In the catacombs at Rome, in the mountains of Bohemia, in the Vaudois valleys, in the wild glens of Scotland and in almost every land, in the simple breaking of bread and the pouring out of wine Believers still remembered Christ's death even though they met together at the peril of their lives! And right on down to these brighter days in which we can meet two or three at a time, or hundreds or thousands at once to break bread and to drink wine in remembrance of our dying Lord, there has always been a Church of Christ and there will always be a Church of Christ! So do not despair however dark the days may yet be. Neither Rome nor Hell, itself, can put out the candle which has been lit by the Lord! There will be a Church of Christ "till He comes."

It is true that there will always be people to oppose this Doctrine and one reason why you are to continue to observe this ordinance is because there will always be some people who will deny Christ's substitutionary death. Dear Friends and fellow-helpers in the Lord, it seems such a sweet thing to me to think that all the communicants at this ordinance tonight will be helping to preach a sermon upon our text! I alone must do the talking, but you who will presently gather around the Communion Table will unite in this act, by which we shall all say, "Christ died on Calvary's Cross. Christ died for us!" And all the other Truths that I have been mentioning to you--by the very eating of the bread and the drinking of the wine, you will proclaim again that there are some who believe in the bleeding Savior--some who still believe in Him as dying in their place! Let others deny it if they will, you will maintain that testimony.

Beloved, this ordinance is to be perpetual, because Christian hearts will always need it. There were some people, a little while ago, who were getting so wonderfully perfect (in their own estimation) that I thought, at the time, they would soon give up the observance of ordinances. I read of one of them who said that he did not pray any longer, for his mind was so perfectly sanctified and conformed to the will of God that he did not need to ask anything of God! Poor fool--that is all I can say of a person in such a state of heart as that! When any man gets beyond the need of prayer, he has urgent need to begin his Christian life over! And it is the same with those who have got beyond the need of ordinances. Christ knew that we should never, in this life, be able to do without outward ordinances. He knew that His people would be forgetful, even of Himself, so He gave us this double "forget-me-not"--this sweet memorial of His death, that as often as we observe it, we may observe it in remembrance of Him.

Moreover, the world, itself, will always need this ordinance. There will never come a day when the world will not need to have the Crucified Christ set before it. There will never be an hour in which there will not be breaking hearts that need consolation, wandering souls that need reclaiming and others who are seeking self-salvation, who will need to be taught that salvation lies in Another--and is to be found only in the bleeding Lamb of Calvary. May God help us to

maintain this testimony for the world's sake, for the poor sinner's sake, for our own sake and for Christ's sake "till He comes."

I have done when I have made one more remark, which is this. If what I have said about this ordinance is true, then, LET US ATTEND TO IT. If in this way we set forth Christ's death--if our coming to the Communion Table calls attention to that great fact--if we unite in this act of fellowship in testimony to the death of Christ, let us attend to it.

What shall I say to some of you who, I trust, have Christ as your Master, but who have never yet obeyed this command of His? Let me ask you whether He has ever given you exemption from the observance of this ordinance and let me also ask you whether, as He though it wise to ordain this ordinance, you ought not to think it wise to observe it? Did He institute it in order that you might neglect it? Has He instituted any ordinance which it is right for His people to neglect? Do you know how much you have already lost through your disobedience to your Lord's command? You tell me that it will not save you. I know that. And you know as well as I do that you should not come to the Communion Table if you thought it would save you, for none are invited to come but those who are already saved! But I should like you to look at this matter in the way in which a poor young man spoke of the other ordinance instituted by the Lord Jesus Christ.

He had not all his wits, but the Grace of God had been at work within him and, as he lay dying, his chief regret was that he had not been baptized. His sisters said to him, "Well, but you know, Isaac, that baptism will not save you." He answered, "I know that very well, for I am already saved. But," He added, "I expect to meet the Lord Jesus Christ very soon and I should not like Him to say to me, 'Why did you not do that little thing to please Me?'" There is much force in that remark. The smaller the thing is, the greater reason is there why we should attend to it directly, lest we should be supposed to have said, "I would not do even that little thing to please Christ." If coming to the Communion Table would save you, of course you would come out of sheer selfishness! But if your religion is nothing but selfishness, may the Lord have mercy upon you and give you a far better one! It is the privilege of those who are saved to show their obedience to Christ and their love to Him by coming to His Table. Do you think that you can look Him in the face and say, "My Lord, You have instituted this ordinance to be observed in remembrance of You, but I have never observed it"? May He not look upon you and say, "It is but a small thing and it is for your soul's good--can you not do that for Me?" You ought to question whether you are in a right state of heart if you can be negligent of this command of your Lord.

But I must also speak to those who do observe the ordinance in a fashion, but who do not enter into the true spirit of it. Those who come rightly to the Table proclaim Christ's death "till He comes," but I am afraid that there are, at all Communion Services, some who do not think aright concerning Christ's death. I always feel very sad, when I am presiding at this ordinance, if I find my thoughts wandering away from the last dread scene upon the Cross. I would rather not be at the Table of my Lord than be here thinking of something else beside His sufferings and death. What can be the use of the outward ordinance if inward and spiritual Grace is lacking? Beg the Lord to restrict all your thoughts to the Cross. Make this your prayer, "Bind the Sacrifice with cords, even with cords to the horns of the altar," and let that Altar be the broken body of your Lord upon the Cross. Of Him let me think, and in Him let me rest all through the Communion Service, and let me see to it that I do reverently, humbly, heartily proclaim His death "till He comes."

Come then, Beloved, unworthy as you are, come to His Table! Come trembling because of your sin, but rejoicing in His Sacrifice and grateful for His great love! Come and trust Him over again! Come and give yourselves up to Him once more. Come and renew your vows of affection and devotion. Come and put your finger into the print of the nails and thrust your hand into His pierced side. No, more than that, say what the spouse does as she begins the song of songs, "Let Him kiss me with the kisses of His mouth: for Your love is better than wine." Seek to get near to Him, to come into close contact with Him and when you do so, hold Him fast and do not let Him go, but call together your friends and Christian Brothers and Sisters and say to them, "Here is the Master! Come with me and let us together have sweet fellowship with Him." If, tonight, at the Communion Table, I might thus lay hold of the great Angel of the Covenant, I think I should feel inclined to hold Him till the break of day, as Jacob did at Jabbok. And if He should make my sinews shrink, yet would I bless His name for condescending to tarry and wrestle with me! If you can get into contact with Him, make this your resolve, that you will hold fast and will say to Him, "I will not let You go, except You bless me."

EXPOSITION BY C. H. SPURGEON:

PSALM 22:1-9; MATTHEW27:33-44.

Psalm 22:1. My God, My God, why have You forsaken Me?What a dolorous cry! How terrible it must have been to have heard that cry! How much more terrible to have uttered it! For the dear Son of God, the Well-Beloved, with whom the Father is always pleased, to be forsaken of His God was, indeed, unfathomable grief!

Why are You so far from helping Me, and from the words of My roaring? It seems as if the Savior's voice and almost His mind had failed Him, for He calls His prayer, "roaring," likening Himself to a wounded beast. When any of You cannot pray, or think You cannot, remember these words of your Lord! If He, the Ever-Blessed Son of God, speaks of His own prayer as a, "roaring," what must ours be? You know that Isaiah spoke of his own prayer as being like the chattering of a crane or a swallow, or the mourning of a dove, as if there were no articulate utterance about it. But to the ears and eyes of God, there is music in a sigh and beauty in a tear. As our Lord had to pray like this, do not wonder if we, sometimes, should feel that God has forsaken us. If there were such dark clouds for Christ, there may well be some for us also.

O My God, I cry in the daytime, but You hear not; and in the night season, and am not silent If we remember Gethsemane and think how Jesus prayed there, even to an agony and a bloody sweat, shall we wonder if, sometime, our prayers seem to be put on one side and we do not immediately receive answers of peace to them? Yet, You see, our Lord kept on crying to God both day and night.

But You are holy, O You that inhabits the praises of Israel Settle it in your hearts that whatever God does, He is holy. Never harbor a thought against Him, never imagine that He is hard, or unjust, or unfaithful. That cannot be, so if the worst comes to the worst, never let your faith have any question upon this point.

5. Our fathers trusted in You; they trusted, and You did deliver them. They cried unto You, and were delivered: they trusted in You, and were not confounded. Look back and see how God helped our ancestors. Recall how, in the past ages, the Lord always was the Deliverer of all those that trusted in Him. Was a righteous man ever finally forsaken of God? Since the world began, has not the Lord, sooner or later, appeared to deliver His children? It is wonderful to hear our Divine Master pleading in this fashion! But most wonderful of all is that next verse--

But I am a worm, and no man; a reproach of men, and despised of the people. There is a little red worm which seems to be nothing else but blood when it is crushed. It seems all gone except a blood-stain and the Savior, in the deep humiliation of His spirit, compares Himself to that little red worm. How true it is that, "He made Himself of no reputation" for our sakes! He emptied Himself of all His Glory and if there is any glory natural to manhood, He emptied Himself even of that! Not only the glories of His Godhead, but the honors of His Manhood He laid aside that it might be seen that, "though He was rich, yet for our sakes He became poor."

7, 8. All they that see Me laugh Me to scorn: they shoot out the lip, they shake the head saying, He trusted on the LORD that He would deliver Him: let Him deliver Him, seeing He delighted in Him. Or, as the passage is quoted in Matthew, "Let Him deliver Him now, if He will have Him."

But You are He that took Me out of the womb: You did make Me hope when I was upon My mother's breasts. This is a very amazing thing. I do not think we remember as we ought that for years after our birth, we could do nothing to help ourselves, yet we were taken care of even then. He who has passed safely through his infancy need not be afraid that God will not help him through the rest of his life. And if we should live so long that we come to a second infancy, the God who carried us through the first will carry us through the second! He has already done so much for us that we are bound to trust Him for all the future. Now let us see, as I reminded You just now, how this passage is referred to in the Gospel according to Matthew.

Matthew 27:33, 34. And when they were come unto a place called Golgotha, that is to say a place of a skull, they gave Him vinegar to drink mingled with gall: and when He had tasted thereof, He would not drink This was a stupefying draught which was usually given to prisoners about to die in order to mitigate their pain and, therefore, Christ would not drink it, for He was determined to suffer even to the bitter end. He did not come to have any mitigation of His agony when He was offering His Atonement for us. And so, "when He had tasted thereof, He would not drink."

And they crucified Him, and parted His garments, casting lots that it might be fulfilled which was spoken by the Prophet, They parted My garments among them, and upon My vesture did they cast lots. This is a point upon which we cannot say much, but, to the peculiarly sensitive soul of Jesus, it must have been a great part of His shame thus to be stripped of every garment and hung up before the sun.

36, 37. Andsitting down theey watcheedHim here; andset up over His heeadHis accusation written: THIS IS JESUS THE KING OF THE JEWS. By their own confession, He died for being a King and He died for being too greatly good, too royal in His love. He, being King of kings, died that you and I might live forever and be kings and priests unto God.

38, 39. Then were there two thieves crucified with Him, one on the right hand, and another on the left And they that passed by reviled Him, wagging their heads. Not only they that sat there, such as the scribes, and Pharisee, and soldiers, and they that hung there, the thieves that were crucified with Him, but the passers-by reviled Him, indulging in a sneer.

40-43. And saying, You, that destroy the Temple, and build it in three days, save Yourself If You are the Son of God, come down from the Cross. Likewise also the chief priest mocking Him, with the scribes and elders, said, He saved others: Himself He cannot save. If He is the King of Israel, let Him now come down from the Cross and we will believe Him. That is the cry of the mockers today. If we will but give up the Atonement, men say that they will believe in Christ. His Character is so excellent that they will accept Him as an example, (so they say), but they will not have His Godhead, nor His precious blood! This proves that they are enemies, for they use the same language as His bitterest foes did when He hung upon the Cross. As for the scribes, they were learned in the Psalms and, therefore, they quoted what we have already read.

43, 44. He trusted in God, let Him deliver Him now, if He will have Him: for He said, I am the Son of God. The thieves also which were crucified with Him, cast the same in His teeth. Thus the Master passed through bitter trial and ignominy for our sakes.
